Chris, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Michael, thank you so much for having me.
It's great to be here.
Yeah, I'm really looking forward to talking about this kind of meta developer topic.
We're both developers and course creators and things like that,
but there's a whole mental side, focus side, flow side of programming
that's honestly both important and kind of interesting, right?
If you get it right, it makes a big difference.
Yeah, for sure.
for sure so looking forward to talking to you about that stuff and everything else but before
yeah before we jump in though maybe you know tell the world who you are introduce yourself just a
bit absolutely so chris ferdinandi um i'm a web developer i have adhd which is a big part of what
we're talking about today um and uh my for the last decade or so um i have been focused on
building all things front end. Early in my career, I felt like I couldn't get anything done. But
since then, I've discovered a whole bunch of systems and strategies that have let me turn my
ADHD from sometimes a liability into occasionally a superpower. So I've been talking to folks about
tips and tricks for doing that. When I'm not talking about ADHD, I'm creating courses and
workshops. I publish a couple of daily newsletters, speak at events, and I work with some really cool
clients. Fantastic. And you say you're a web developer. What's your tech stack? And we're
not here specifically to talk Python, but... Yeah, no, no, for sure. Yeah. So for me,
it's actually, it's almost exclusively front end. So HTML, CSS, JavaScript. I occasionally,
reluctantly dabble in the backend, primarily PHP because I learned web development through
WordPress. Although as we were talking about pre-show, I actually had the opportunity recently
to work on a project um uh for nasa of of all places which was really cool uh where python was
the back end and i was tying into some back-end apis with uh with some javascript stuff which was
really fun really great to work with super performant um it was it was a real real joy to work with
oh that's fantastic yeah i recently had kind of an experience with that maybe a year ago
with lauren the guy who built our mobile apps that was all in flutter and it was like lots of
though now we got to do that make the api do this and like we'll and just super fun to work that way
if you if you're good people on both ends you know i guess oh absolutely and it was one of the things
where like i knew a little bit about the back end and the back end guy knew a little bit about the
front end so we could we could talk to each other but like we were not experts at each other's thing
so it worked out really well that sounds familiar so front end stuff are you got frameworks that you
you work with are you a view person are you a react person or or something else i am uh
anti-framework feels a little strong earlier in my career i was anti-framework these days i am
it's a framework reluctant um so i a big part of what i advocate for folks is that uh on the front
end there is a simpler easier way to build things often that involves just using what the browser
gives you out of the box. And a big part of that for me is that if you're a backend person,
while the tools you choose do matter, your front end users don't often pay as heavy a tax for those
choices. But on the front end- Unless it's really slow or something, but as long as it runs faster,
they don't care. Exactly. But on the front end, every kilobyte that gets shipped is a kilobyte.
The user has to download, the browser has to parse,
and the front end is just such an unpredictable
and unforgiving environment.
So yeah.
- Unpredictable is the word.
- Right, yeah.
You just, you really don't know what you're gonna get.
So I try to advocate for what I think is maybe
a little bit more simple or resilient a way
of building things for the browser.
And yeah, I guess a little bit of a dinosaur in that regard.
- No, I love it.
And I was just thinking, honestly,
thinking about ADHD, front end stuff,
I feel like generally JavaScript front end stuff
makes me feel like I have ADHD just from the pay attention
to this, no, now this, stop paying, now this.
Like, oh my gosh, I can't focus, you know?
- The velocity of change, and not just change,
'cause it's great that new stuff's coming out.
The fickleness, I think sometimes,
of the people who use the tools is really jarring,
where a thing that is the right way to do something today
is considered obsolete like six to 12 months from now.
- Yeah. - That can get really frustrating.
As someone with ADHD, I think it's a big part of why
kind of ignoring a lot of that stuff is so appealing to me,
'cause when you focus on web standards,
even though new stuff comes out,
the old stuff continues to work just fine
and you don't have to throw out
a whole mountain's worth of knowledge every 12 months.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, you know, obviously I know the term ADHD.
I know kind of what it means.
I don't have a real good sense for in reality what it is
to like be a person with ADHD rather than just,
it's hard to focus sometimes, you know,
or your thoughts wonder or something.
- Yep.
- So, yeah.
- Let's go with that. - It's so much more than that too.
- Yeah, I'm sure that it is.
So like, let's start there.
- Yeah, so ADHD is actually a really terrible name
for what it is.
So ADHD stands for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder.
But people with ADHD don't actually have
a deficit of attention.
I think it seemed that way in the 80s
when the term was coined because the most
like stereotypical ADHD person was really hyperactive
and kind of all over the place
and like poorly focused on things.
but it's actually an executive functioning disorder.
And one of its hallmark features
is that you have trouble regulating your attention.
So sometimes that means you've got like 18 things
going on in your head and you can't focus on any of them.
Other times it causes this other phenomenon
called hyper focus, which is a little bit like
if you go into the zone as a developer,
except way more intense and you can't usually control
what you're hyper focused on.
So sometimes it's something really useful and awesome
and like what you're supposed to be doing related.
And then other times it's like,
hey, I've got all these important things to do,
but I can't stop Googling stuff about like RVs and campers
because that's currently what I'm really obsessed with
and my brain won't let me think of anything else.
- Yeah, yeah, it's summertime.
Why not be obsessed with that, right?
- Right.
There's a whole bunch of other things
that kind of can be around ADHD.
little bit like autism. ADHD has a spectrum of symptoms. Not everyone who has it has all
of them. Everybody's ADHD experience is a little bit different. But you know, it can include
things like having more, more severe emotional responses to things than someone neurotypical
might. So along with that, there's this other thing called RSD rejection sensitivity dysphoria
where like a perceived slight,
you will take much more like deeply and personally
than a neurotypical person might,
usually in a way that is like out of scope
for the actual size of the thing that happened to you.
So, and these are things,
I didn't learn about some of this stuff
until like in the last few years.
And it really like,
I knew I had ADHD since I was a kid.
I was that stereotypical really hyper kid.
And I always just thought that's what it was.
And then about four or five years ago,
I started hearing more about like some of the newer research and discovered all these like things that I thought were just weird personal failings about me were actually ADHD related.
Interesting.
Yeah, another one is time blindness.
So ADHD folks often just literally cannot perceive time accurately.
So sometimes it feels like it's going by really fast.
Sometimes it feels like it's going by really slow.
In both cases, it's usually not, it doesn't feel like it actually is.
And I know everybody experiences that to some degree,
but for ADHD folks, it is much more often,
usually all the time.
You can imagine if you work in a situation
where you need to make accurate estimates on things
and accurately track your hours,
that creates some unique challenges there.
And then the other thing with ADHD
is you're not always hyper.
So there's three subtypes.
Inattentive, which is exactly what it sounds like,
where you have trouble kind of regulating your focus.
The other one is hyperactive, and that's actually,
so the impulsive variant is what used to be called ADD
way back in the day.
Now it's just all ADHD with three different kind of variants.
The other one is hyperactive or impulsive,
which is I think what most people stereotypically think of
as ADHD, and that often doesn't often appear
without also having that like inattentive,
I can't regulate my attention bit.
And so many, many people have what's called combined subtype,
which you're hyper and you have trouble regulating your focus.
I'm blessed with that kind.
Okay.
The inattentive variant is far, I'm rambling and I'm sorry,
it's one of my superpowers.
The inattentive variant is both more common in women
and far more underdiagnosed because it doesn't show up
with the hyperactivity and so it's way less obvious.
And so historically, they thought ADHD was primarily like a guy thing.
And I think it's becoming a lot more obvious that many more women have it than previously thought.
They just don't usually get diagnosed because they don't often show the hyperactivity part of it.
Right, right.
They're not running around the classroom or something along those lines.
And you're like, whoa.
This also led to that whole thing in the 80s of like, oh, it's overdiagnosed.
diagnosed that's just boys being boy just you know all the yeah all the stuff around that so um so
anyways that's i didn't want to say a nutshell because that was very long-winded but that's um
that's kind of the high level overview of what adhd is like um yeah it's fun yeah no it's
except when it's not no i'm sure well you know it sounds like some of those things are
probably annoying when you need them to not be there right like if time feels like it's going
super slowly but it's not you know like oh gosh this hour is like utterly dragging on or yeah um
but you can also use it for the powers of good right yeah one thing i forgot to mention the kind
of the one of the root like biological aspects of adhd is that our brains don't produce as much
dopamine as they should. And so a majority of the symptoms associated with it are related to
like a dopamine shortage. so even like I recently learned that your brain's ability to
perceive time is actually related to how much dopamine you have, which I thought was, Oh, I see.
That's like a, like a tick tock of like you receiving dopamine is almost like a time flow.
Right. And so a lot of the time flies fast when you're having fun as an ADHD person,
even more intensely because that dopamine your brain wouldn't normally be producing enough of
gets ramped up when you're when you're excited or you're enjoying yourself um it's like um
like a desert a dried up desert river versus when the monsoons come it's like raging right
exactly yeah so there's no normal time for me it's either moving very slowly or flying by
for better or worse.
Yeah.
So I don't know how much personal experience
you can bring to this really,
but Jazzy out there asked,
like, do you think Python is a good language
for devs with ADHD?
It's a great language to get stuff done quickly.
It doesn't have too many symbols
or distractive other bits to it.
Yeah, you know, for sure.
So I generally think Python, yes.
Programming in general is a great profession.
One of the things I'm finding is that ADHD folks seem overrepresented in development.
And I would agree with that.
A lot of that has to do with the tight feedback loop you get with coding where you write some code, you run it, a thing happens or it doesn't.
And you get that immediate like it worked and didn't kind of feedback loop, which triggers the dopamine thing in your head and then causes you to really like start.
start digging into it.
To answer Jazzy's specific question though,
even though I teach front end stuff over at gomakethings.com,
I have so many front end students who are like,
I wanted to learn backend language.
And I went with Python because it's really, really clear.
And there's a lot of like,
this is the correct way to do things.
Whereas like JavaScript, like anything you want to do,
there's at least three different ways you could do it.
And none of them are inherently better than the other, right?
- And there's four frameworks that came out this week
you do it. Right. So, yeah, so I probably, I don't have enough Python experience to like
accurately say like, yes, that's the right one. But I just, I think programming in general is a,
it is a profession or hobby. If you just want to do it for fun, that plays well to the ADHD
mind. It can trigger that time is flying by really fast because I'm, if not enjoying it,
at least very engaged in the activity.
And it can make what would feel like work
for a normal person feel like a really enjoyable,
fun thing that you can't get enough of.
There are downsides to that too.
Like you could go through like an eight hour,
like just coding bender and find that you haven't eaten,
used the bathroom, gotten up to stretch
in any way, taking care of yourself.
'Cause your body just didn't let you know.
- Yeah.
Well, I've had those experiences as well.
And I don't know if there's some aspect of ADHD
or if it's just, I just got really focused,
but I've certainly gotten up.
- Why is it dark?
How is it dark?
- Yeah.
- Gosh, I am hungry.
I'm gonna have to deal with some of this stuff.
- Right, yeah.
The thing, so that hyper focus for ADHD folks,
I heard, I had an old coworker who used to refer to that
as weaponized ADHD.
So if you can get yourself into that state often,
you can be like way more productive than yours.
The problem is you can't always like force yourself into hyper focus.
There's no like, Oh, I just flipped the switch and I'm there. Right.
and so you will have periods of intense productivity.
And then you might have some periods where you're less productive than both your average and the average of your coworkers.
and depending on your work situation, that can,
that can lead to some uncomfortable conversations where it's like hey you did really great last
quarter and this quarter you can't seem to get anything done what's going on um yeah i can see
that yeah do you feel like uh the folks with adhd like that they're more susceptible to maybe
the fluctuations of those two things from a sort of flow state to like i'm not feeling it but i got
it i got a job it's it's time to just grind it until i feel it again you feel like those fluctuations
are are wider like you're less productive when you feel it less and you're maybe even more productive
when you're in the game so yes and the other piece of this that's really tough is so where a
neurotypical person might be like man i'm not feeling it today but i'm not gonna keep working
here if i don't do the thing right yeah an adhd person will um go into like this almost like
freeze state um yeah okay where and i think that's actually the like the official like uh psychology
term for it but you can stare at your screen for eight hours just not get up and you won't type like
a line of code you'll just be like trying to just the inertia of getting started is really really
tough okay it's all it's like writer's block but it is yeah literally it's like writer's block
except your brain just will not will your body to do what it needs to do um uh yeah and so one of
things. So over at ADHD for the wind.com, I've been writing a lot about my, my ADHD
experience and kind of some tips and recommendations on how to get around a
lot of this stuff. And one of the things that I and a lot of other folks have
found is that traditional productivity advice just does not work for most folks
with ADHD. So like if you're a proponent of like getting things done or some of
those other systems, a lot of times what they'll tell you is start with your biggest task and get
that done first. That way it's out of the way. All right. Big tasks trigger massive overwhelm
in the ADHD brain if you're not already like, I cannot wait to chew this task up and spit it out
because I'm so excited about it. Right. And sometimes even then. So one of the things that
I wrote about recently was that I actually think folks should start with their smallest task first
because the most important thing is getting moving.
You're almost like this big rock
and you've got a lot of inertia.
And right now that inertia is telling you,
stay right where you are.
Once you get rolling,
sometimes you can move yourself into the state
where you become difficult to stop.
So the most important thing
is just start doing something
that moves you in the direction of work.
So for me, like-
So maybe you go for the small things, right?
Because they're easy wins.
You get that dopamine,
like prime the pump sort of.
Absolutely. Exactly. So, you know, so for me, a lot of times that I start my morning off by writing
my daily tech article, because I, they're really short. It's one of those things where I,
it's like a habit for me now. And it gets me, I'm at a desk, I'm typing and I've produced a thing
and I shipped it. And now I can get on with the rest of my day. and I'm, I'm like in work mode.
and if I have a day where I have a meeting in the morning and I don't get to do that,
it will derail me for literally hours.
That actually happened to me this morning.
Actually, I had a client meeting
and it was first thing in the morning.
And it was a really great meeting.
It was super productive,
but I didn't ship anything.
And so then when the meeting ended,
I was really underproductive for about two hours.
Just kind of stuck, not able to get going again.
Okay, interesting.
Yeah, interesting, annoying.
also very very very annoying right it's well it is it is super annoying however knowing at least
awareness of that is pretty interesting yeah so this is i guess the next a nice segue here michael
is that one of the big things that i advocate for um so i am while i admit that adhd has a lot of
challenges like the one i just described i'm also someone who's adhd positive i don't think it's like
this thing i have to deal with um i guess in a manner of speaking it is but it's not like
oh this has ruined my life um right so a big part of here's why i can't do anything with the rest of
my life i'm right sure a big part of what i advocate for is working with your adhd instead
of against it so like i know that that that is a thing that happens if i feel that i'm in one of
those moods where i just can't get moving no amount of staring at the screen is going to change that
what is going to change that is doing a handful of other things that usually involve not using my
brain at all um so uh there are a whole bunch of activities that will produce dopamine in your
brain and that usually helps um so drinking coffee or soda or something with caffeine in it um uh
the core mechanism by which most adhd medicines work is by either making your brain make more
dopamine or stopping your brain from absorbing the stuff it does make so that more of it like
floats around um exercise literally just getting exposure to sun um so i now that i am old i i've
started gardening which gets me like two for one so i'll go outside i dig some holes i move some
heavy like literally heavy rocks around gets me going i get some sun i don't have to think i'm
just using my hands yeah uh and then i come in and i will get like eight hours worth of work done
in about three or four hours.
Cause I, I'm now I'm ready.
That's awesome.
It's really like a big,
a big part of the ADHD experience
is learning to listen to your body
and just step away.
Like staring at a screen is not gonna help you.
Yeah, yeah.
It's not, not that you're weak for stepping away.
It's not, your persistence is not necessarily
gonna help you if you can't sort of reset a little bit.
I think that's, that's true for a lot of people.
For me, I don't know if it's the same thing.
Probably going to say that a lot this episode.
But for me, one of the things that I've tried to embrace that sounds familiar is inspiration.
I find that if I'm really psyched to work on something or I'm just like, I really don't want to do this, but I got to get it done.
There's like a 5X difference in productivity for me.
And so if I, it's like, I'm an adult.
I should be able just to pay attention.
It's like, there's a right thing.
No, it's ridiculously out of whack.
And so I can find if I can just, okay, now is not the time for that.
This afternoon might be the time for that.
What else can I do?
Maybe I'll go for a ride in my motorcycle for an hour in the mountains
and get some sun and come back, sort of reset,
or just grind on email or stop grinding on email.
Whatever it is, just change that up and try to sense the inspiration
or the lack thereof in my brain for something
and then try to ride that wave when I see it coming, you know?
Yeah, absolutely.
And, you know, one of the things that you touched on a couple of times you brought up,
hey, I do that too.
So the thing with ADHD is I could describe a whole range of symptoms
and most people will be like, oh, that happens to me sometimes.
And it does because most ADHD symptoms are things that everybody experiences sometimes.
And so kind of the difference between I have ADHD and don't have ADHD
what would lead you to have a doctor be like, yes, you have it. It's usually a measurement of
how often and how many of these things you experience on the regular. So when you get
diagnosed, there's a whole set of questions you have to answer. And the doctor adds up a bunch
of numbers. And if you hit a high enough number, they're like, yeah, you probably have ADHD.
I see. Yeah. Interesting. Okay. So kind of like if you ask somebody,
have you ever felt like down in the dumps?
Have you ever felt today is hopeless or whatever?
Like almost everyone's going to have a day where they're like, yep,
today is hopeless.
Crash the car, did this and whatever.
But that doesn't mean you're necessarily have depression. Right.
And like, yeah, for sure. And so the questions will be like, you know,
how often do you have trouble? I'm just making this up. Um,
like how often do you have trouble paying attention to something if you're not
interested in it? Right. And it's like occasionally always, you know, like,
And so you'll have a bunch of those questions that are basically rewordings of questions
you already answered to account for like bias in yourself.
And then you get a number, like each column has a number of the doctor adds it up.
And if you hit the minimum number, you've got ADHD.
Got it.
I see.
Yeah, got it.
All right.
So I want to talk.
That you can do too, by the way, if anybody's listening.
I wonder if I have ADHD.
A psychiatrist who diagnoses you will be able to prescribe you medication if that's something you're interested in.
But if you just think you might have it as a first step, if you head over to ADHDforthewind.com slash Talk Python, I have a bunch of resources.
And one of them is, how do I know if I have ADHD?
I got a link to that self-assessment there so you can kind of dig in.
That's awesome.
Yeah.
You put together some proper stuff for the show.
We're going to talk about a bunch of stuff.
If I missed anything that we talk about,
I'm going to go back and update this later.
I just want to make sure folks have what they need.
Yeah, that's awesome.
I'll definitely put that in the show notes for folks.
And people can sign up for your newsletter.
There's a lot of daily tips,
and we can maybe riff on those a little bit.
Before we get to that, though,
you talked about meetings,
and I think meetings...
I just saw where...
Gosh, I can't remember where it was.
I think it was the Atlantic.com?
The Atlantic, the publication.
And it said something to the effect of,
white collar work is just meetings now.
I don't think that's 100% true with development,
but it's a lot and I think it can be a challenge.
I think it can be especially a challenge for people with ADHD.
One thing that I read that connected pretty well with me
is Paul Graham's maker schedule, manager schedule.
I don't know if people have read this before.
It's from 2009, but I think it's still,
it's probably more relevant than ever.
please don't email me that program is great or terrible i'm not trying to promote the guy or
not that just i know vcs always uh get a lot of reactions but this is pretty interesting saying
that like look there are people whose job it is to have meetings and to them they see blocks on
the calendar as well here's another part of my job that i can do and for the rest of us who are
trying to write code and focus this is a disruption and you talked about how it can really derail like
half a day for you so yeah what first of all how's this are you familiar with this and how's this idea
set with you yeah so i am uh if i weren't on your show i'd probably be one of those folks emailing
you about paul so i'm gonna i'm gonna not comment on the article specifically but okay let's put it
away yeah but what i do related to that i don't i don't know that i have strong feelings on like
makers versus managers and whatnot.
But what I do know is that task shifting
is particularly difficult for ADHD folks,
largely because it's so difficult to get into that focus period.
Like you think about a neurotypical developer gets interrupted from focus
and it takes them a little bit to get back into it.
It is way more intense for the average person with ADHD.
And so they create this effect that I've heard described
as like a temporal dead zone, where if I finish a task
and I have a meeting 30 to 60 minutes
from when I finish that task,
I will not start another task.
- Right, that just--
- As I do, I know that by the time I actually get up
enough momentum that I'm doing the task,
I'm gonna get interrupted.
And that's either going to, I'm going to miss the meeting, which used to happen to me constantly,
or I'm going to get annoyed that I have to stop. And the whole time I'm in the meeting,
my brain will be fixated on the other thing and not the meeting. so I won't, I just,
I, I won't start a new task. So I've got this whole block of time that gets eaten.
And then when the meeting ends, now I've got this long on ramp to get shifted back into
my next task after the meeting.
So meetings are bad for developers in general.
They are extraordinarily bad for folks with ADHD.
And one of the things I talk about
is some strategies you can use to try to,
you can't always make it work,
but I used to employ a ton of strategies
when I had like a day job to prevent myself
from getting booked in midday meetings.
I don't mind them at the beginning of the day.
I prefer them more in the afternoon
when i run out of like developer steam but um yeah like a a meeting at like 11 or 2 in the afternoon
just just destroys my day yeah i hear you yeah where i was going with that article is what i've
i've ended up doing is i have just certain days blocked off where those are no meeting days and
that's because i have the flexibility for it and you know yeah you've been you're doing this stuff
independently now not a nine to five is that right yes but even when i was at a nine to five i used
to do stuff like that because you just gotta depending on the culture you're in like some
places are just full of excess meetings um and it becomes very necessary yeah then your job is to go
to the meetings i mean right right i mean there's the whole joke right about like this meeting could
have been an email i have found that some companies are worse at that than others um you know there
Some environments I've been in, they're really cool about async communication.
Other places, like the de facto, it's just block time on people's calendar.
And that is awful.
I don't know where this social expectation that you could just block time on someone's calendar at any point for any reason came from.
But it's awful.
Exactly.
I'm going to reach out.
I'm going to grab some time with you.
It's like, hold on.
That's just open-ended.
Yeah, I found that article.
I'll link it.
White-collar work is just meetings now.
it's interesting yeah blocking blocking time i think is a a great strategy um one i guess one
tangential thing here because it's not just meetings right it's if you're in office um
and you're in an open office environment the pop-in is an absolute nightmare um uh if you have adhd i
mean we've i'm sure you've seen before michael articles about how open office environments are
bad for productivity just generally um yeah again it's one of those things worse if you have adhd
um if you're on a remote team sometimes there's a culture on slack or discord that like replicates
that open office environment pop in where you're expected to just always like respond quickly
on those tools um and so there are two paths you can take if you have adhd
and this stuff is messing with your day you can either ask for forgiveness instead of permission
just take what you want. So I, for a long while, I just I had this thing where I would, I would just
turn off slack. And I would check it like, two, maybe three times a day. And if someone really,
really needed me, my manager had my cell phone, and he could call me if it was like, super,
super important. Same thing with email, that kind of thing. So that's one path. The other path is,
You can have a conversation with your manager.
The laws around this vary from country to country,
but in America specifically, where I live,
the Americans with Disabilities Act requires companies
to provide reasonable accommodations for disabilities,
and ADHD actually qualifies as one.
So you can say things like,
I need to be able to work from home,
or you need to give me a private office
where the team lead who keeps shooting Nerf darts at my head
can't do that anymore,
or that's a real story that used to happen to me
in a previous employer.
Oh my gosh.
Yeah, he was a bozo.
Or I need to have days where I don't have meetings.
Or it would be really great for me
if more of our communication happened asynchronously.
Or if you ask me to do things,
I need someone to follow up in writing with that
or I'm gonna forget, right?
There's like a whole series of things you could ask for.
I have a list of accommodations over at my site as well
that I'll make sure ends up in the cheat sheet
I put together for this episode.
but, but yeah, asking your employer, if you feel comfortable can be a great thing
to do.
I am at a point in my career where I feel very comfortable having those conversations
and I bring it up with clients, for the last four or five years of my
like working career, I brought it up with my employers, any of my managers, I would bring
it up and job interviews but I am a cisgendered heterosexual white dude with a whole lot of
professional experience and I have talked to more junior developers people who are LGBTQ people who
are minorities and they have all told me some version of I already feel like I am under more
scrutiny because of my my gender my skin color my identity and I don't want to give my employer
another reason to look at my work more closely um and so i i'm realizing as i'm saying this
i like i fully acknowledge that i'm in a privileged position to be able to do that
but if you feel comfortable it can in the right culture make your life at work a lot better and a
lot easier yeah i totally agree do you feel like the work from home stuff it's been a boon it has
As for me, I have also talked to some ADHD folks who they feel like it doesn't have enough.
Structure isn't the right word.
There's like a bit of an accountability that can happen when you're in the office where
just seeing other people doing work means that if you are sitting at your desk and you look
like you're not doing work, that's bad.
So it gives them at least a bit of a like a push to start moving.
And there is a technique called body doubling where you literally like just sit on a live cam with someone else and co-work in silence together that is supposed to address this.
I find it deeply uncomfortable.
I actually prefer to not do that.
But I do know some ADHD folks find it helpful.
But for me, I went remote pre-pandemic.
I had been remote for a while.
And it had been the single best thing for my productivity that I've ever done.
Even before 2020, it was like a non-starter for me
for any job I applied for after I had gone remote
that I would never go into an office again.
I mean, I hear you.
I've done that since 2006.
And so it's just like, that's how work is for me.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
I think it was like 2009-ish for me.
I was hybrid and then I went full.
And it was just not without its own challenges, right?
Because if there are days where you just,
you're not into it, it's really easy.
for me to then not do anything and that's fine every now and then um but if it happens too much
you can find yourself in a situation where you've got like a big backlog of work that just didn't
get done and that's bad um uh but yeah on the whole i would say it's been a huge blessing um
it's not a problem to focus it's not a problem like there's too many distractions like over there's my
sim racing machine if i'm feeling like i can't i just get up and go do that instead and then
eventually like i do that half the day and i you know like if that were how work from home worked
for me i could see that that's bad not not at boone and so what do you like well there's a negative
side work from home as well and like trying to stay focused and not like do the dishes and whatever
yeah um doing dishes being like pulled to do the dishes is usually not a problem for adhd folks we
usually have the other problem which is oh god i haven't done the dishes in days but why does the
kitchen look like that how'd that happen right no i know why i just i feel a deep shame about it and
won't address it but um we um uh yeah so i think the bigger challenge with work from home is if you
don't have a dedicated space to do work you can run into some of what you just described you can also
run into a situation where there's just a lot of other stuff around you if there's other people at
at home, if you have a partner who also works from home,
or you have kids and it's like summertime and they're home,
like it can be loud, it can be noisy,
it can be distracting rather.
I don't find the pull of other stuff in my house that bad
because I am coding on what is effectively a very expensive
like gaming and video streaming machine
and it has enough distractions just on the thing
have to do work on already. So there's really not much else. Yeah. There's really not much else in
my house. That's more appealing than the thing I'm sitting in front of to do, to do work on.
That's true. Nothing is as distracting as my phone and my computer already. So I'll just go with that.
Right. Yeah. And they're right. They're right here with me all the time. Yes. All the time.
Yeah. So that part less so it's more the, like the noise. If you don't have a quiet place to work,
that can be challenging.
But I don't think any necessarily any more so than the office.
It's just you're in basically the same position.
Right.
You're in your own open office sort of deal.
All right.
You put together a couple of tools that maybe we could talk a bit about.
Sure.
You talked about building a second brain.
This comes from the book by Tiago Forte, I believe,
which I read not too long ago.
Pretty interesting book.
There's lots of software to accomplish this.
I love Notion and actually AnyType
is what I've moved away from Notion towards.
It was just like similar, which is super fun.
Open source Notion basically.
- I haven't heard of this.
All right.
- So I've been using a city.
- AnyType.io.
Yeah, I've heard that there's a lot of similarities.
- So the big thing with,
one thing we didn't talk about when we talked about
like symptoms of ADHD, we have,
ADHD folks usually have a very large hard drive
and a very small amount of RAM.
So we can only keep one or two things
in our working memory at any particular point.
And second brains are great for everyone,
but if you tell me three things,
there's a good chance I will have forgotten the first two
by the time I get back to my desk.
And so the idea of a second brain,
specifically for folks with ADHD,
is that it becomes the RAM that your brain doesn't have.
So any idea that pops into your head,
any task you've been given, any thought,
anything that you don't want to forget 30 seconds from now
needs to get written down somewhere.
It can be paper, it can be digital.
Both have their pros and cons.
I'm particular, I'm biased towards digital
for being able to search,
but writing things down seems to make stuff stick
a little bit better in a lot of folks' heads.
trying to memorize or you're trying to store it it did put it on digital ice so i think a quick
definition for folks i mean they can imagine what a second brain is but give people a definition
what this means yeah so a second and i'm not gonna i'm not i'm probably not gonna do justice to
like the official definition here but the idea of a second brain um is that it's literally just a
place for you to write down or capture all the things. It's funny, I've read so many different
descriptions of it. And in my head, it always just brings me back to the ubiquitous capture device or
UCD from getting things done parlance. I think it's just like a, in my opinion, it's just a,
like a rebranding of that thing. But the idea is you just, you want a place to capture and write
down all the things you don't want to forget later yeah i it sounds good to me i as a description i
think what i got from reading the book there's a process for capturing the stuff and filtering it
i don't know if i need any of that what i need is it's in my mind and it needs to get written down
in basically a place i could get back to it if i if i want to or even put a reminder around it just
just yeah put it like you said just get it out of ram swap it to disk for a while conceptually
get back to it if you need right yeah absolutely and um the thing with because i know you mentioned
notion i like obsidian uh there's a lot of different tools out there one of the problems for
adhd folks with most digital tools is most of the tools available today do a lot and that is
kind of the problem so i'm going to use i'm going to use obsidian because i know it well but notion
having played with it before is very similar in like capability and what it can do so i look at
a tool like obsidian which is markdown notes that you can kind of access and edit through a gui and
organize into folders and things like that and it has a plug-in ecosystem and you will see similar
with like with a tool like notion like there are consultants who specialize in teaching you how to
get the most out of Notion.
And you can build these really complicated workflows
where you can tie things from a page into another page
and then things show up automatically
in these different views and you get these graphs.
That all sounds really fun.
It's amazing.
I close this thing in my Kanban board on GitHub,
which triggers a thing, which will move this into this page
and then Sarah gets a notification.
You're like, oh my goodness.
So the thing is that sounds fun
and that sounds like an interesting challenge.
It sounds almost like a game.
And if I have a brain that craves dopamine and enjoys kind of gamified experiences, I'm going to spend hours, days, weeks perfecting my to do system.
To the expense of doing the actual things I need to do.
And then down the road, I'm going to be like, oh, this is so complicated and difficult to manage.
This isn't working for me anymore.
And I'm going to throw it away.
I'm going to go repeat this process again with something new.
I talked to a lot of ADHD folks who feel like productivity systems just don't
stick. And a big part of that is because they're, they're overcomplicated.
So I think the thing I found that works best for a lot of, for me,
and I've talked to a lot of folks who've had similar experiences is simple to do
lists. Like everything is a bulleted list.
Even if it's like an idea you want to remember later, it's a bulleted list.
It might not be a to do that you have to check off, but it's a bullet.
And when I use tools like notion or obsidian,
or even a paper notebook excuse me everything is everything is bullets um i install almost
no plugins no add-ons the only thing i have is a my day view where when i tag things with a unicorn
emoji they show up on my day that way i can just flag the thing and i like unicorns because they're
fun but um i it's just it's the place where these are the things i need to do today i can see them
them all on one page. And that's it. I think one of the tools I've found that used to work
still works really well for me, but it's occasionally a little bit buggy now,
Microsoft ToDo, which is their free to do app. I like it because it does less than tools like
Todoist, which does a lot. It's basically just bulleted lists with sub lists under them,
and you can flag stuff in this special, I'm going to do it today page. And it doesn't have any of
the other stuff, which makes it way less distracting.
Sure.
I'm a fan of Todoist.
Sorry, go ahead.
Oh, yeah.
The only reason I moved away from it is I really like authoring and Markdown, and I wanted
something that would do that.
Yeah, that's why I like Notion.
You just write Markdown, and it just becomes magic, where you forward slash it.
I'm a fan of Todoist, but I try to just not overcomplicate it, just kind of have a flow.
Yeah, but it's funny.
I say like, oh, use Obsidian or Notion,
just don't make it too complicated.
But you could do that in Todoist too.
- Yeah, yeah, sure.
- Yeah, they're all, that's the, whatever tool you choose,
just resist the urge to over-engineer it.
I know it's tough, but you'll be much happier
in the long run.
- Just put the extensions down.
- Yeah.
- Another thing you gave a shout out to is the Apple Watch,
which I love my Apple Watch.
It is increasingly, it is a second brain for me
in weird ways.
like for example an hour and a half ago I was recording a course and I put everything on do
not disturb like don't forget to come do the podcast with Chris in an hour and a half so I just
hey set a reminder for an hour and 20 minutes and then I just I didn't stress it like just took the
weight off my brain I could focus back on the course and then oh it's time to go like all right
so my my wife is the reason I have an Apple watch I was I was very resistant because in my mind I'm
I'm already too distractible. I don't need another thing chirping at me.
You literally are putting distractions on my arm. I can't get it off. What are you thinking here?
She was like, just try it. I think it's going to be really helpful for you.
I did, and she was right. Before I got the Apple Watch, I used to miss meetings
constantly. They would go off on my phone. I would snooze them.
More likely, I'd just dismiss them by accident. Then five minutes later,
the meeting would start and I wouldn't be there because I got sucked back into something else.
So having that like right on your wrist for some reason is a real game changer for me.
I set timers for literally everything. Laundry, food that I put in the oven,
anything that needs to get done gets a timer. And then the one thing that I haven't written about
yet, but that has really helped is the one place where you don't usually have your second brain
is in the shower.
And I do a lot of thinking in the shower
and I have some of my best ideas
and I'll be damned if from the time I have the idea
to the five minutes later when I get out
and dry myself off, I have already forgotten it.
Happens all the time.
But if you have the watch,
you can just dictate a note to yourself
or text yourself or do something
and then you have it
and you can like do stuff with it later.
I used to have an old manager
who literally had one of those like scuba diving
chalkboards with the like the grease pen in his shower so that he could write down ideas yeah
this feels like the digital version of that to me where you just you know like hey siri
send a you know write a note that says um and and then you're off to the races um yeah and
for all the failings of siri that that actually works pretty well like the few things like set a
timer set a reminder like they actually work quite well you just hold the crown and yeah i'm
I honestly, now that I'm talking about these two things in parallel with you, I feel like it is sort of my second brain of like reminders and attention in a sense.
Well, yeah, it's because it literally it.
One of two things would always happen to me.
I would either over fixate on the thing so that I don't miss it or I would completely ignore the thing and miss it.
And the Apple Watch lets me do the latter without missing the thing.
so i can free my brain to do other stuff and i know i'm not going to miss my events my important
stuff um sure and people out there who are like i'm not an apple person why are they like you
couldn't get uh you can get a google wear android wear and do basically the same thing i imagine
first well i don't have a lot of experience with those unfortunately because i am very big into the
apple ecosystem but i need to stop saying apple watch and start talking about smart watches more
more generally because you're right.
My biggest disappointment with the Apple Watch
is that it requires an iPhone to work.
I think that's dumb and annoying.
- It's completely dumb.
- But yeah, if that's you,
if you don't have an iPhone
or you're not in the Apple ecosystem,
I would look at some of the Android options
because I think just a smartwatch in general
has been a really amazing tool for me.
Probably one of the most important in my toolkit.
- Yeah, it's so frustrating.
I don't want to cut down this at all much,
but I was looking at the nothing, you know, the nothing phones.
They're super interesting.
They're really quite different.
Where's...
I seem to recall this from a few years ago.
Yeah, they've got some interesting different ways about,
like, they've got stuff on the back that will flash
and they communicate things.
Yeah, they're...
Swap your own, or am I thinking of something?
No, that's framework.
So they've got these, it's like hieroglyphics on the back
that mean different things if they light up.
I'm like, this is cool.
I kind of want to play with this stuff.
But my Apple Watch would basically be dead.
Like you can't, I'm like, well, I'm going nowhere.
Anyway.
I can't imagine why Apple would do that.
I can't.
It makes no sense.
It must be an oversight.
Right, clearly.
We've got a little bit of time left, maybe 10 minutes.
what do we what do you think about maybe going through uh some of those daily tips or something
like the idea of them and maybe just pick a couple that you want to just give a shout out to how's
that sound yeah yeah well and so um one of the things i'm i'm in the middle or i said the beginning
of a series on how to get stuff done when you have adhd and i'm breaking it into two parts one of them
is like i'm calling it productivity.app which is my like my approach to getting stuff done and then
operating system. And the hacking your brain's operating system feels like there's potentially
some interesting nuggets in there. I'm looking through the list though, and I actually think
we've talked about most of them.
Nice.
Yeah. That's where just organically they have all, because you brought up the Apple watch
that would have been the one that doesn't always get brought up but you brought it up um one other
thing though i will say um there are so this happened the other day i wrote about but one of
the i think one of the things i've i've come to realize is there are certain types of work that
lend within the development space which lend themselves better to the adhd brain than others
um and so i look at something like agency work agency work can be like a a blessing or a curse
depending on the agency and i know that's again generally true but yeah a quick definition for
people who are new to programming or outside of the consulting world agency work what is that
so this would be like a development agency that builds some sort of thing uh could be could be a
mobile app could be a website whatever it happens to be for a variety of different clients so they
have a range of clients they work with and they get contracted and you are a developer on that team
and i contrast that against being an in-house developer where you're like i work at ibm and i
manage all the web properties for ibm or i write this app for ibm whatever happens to be um yeah i
build the authentication integration between all our internal apps and keep them running or whatever
Yeah, exactly. So this is more like you're like a bee floating from client to client.
Now, that can be awesome. If you're the right kind of agency, that means you're constantly
getting variety in clients and work. So you've got novelty and you can just absolutely crush it
with that kind of work. However, sometimes you have agencies that are like, we build WordPress
press sites for ice cream shops. That's all we do. We know it.
And you get to a point where it's like, it's cookie cutter. And
that is like just mind numbingly boring for I like it's, it can be easy work.
It can be work that you do very effectively that you can apply like unique,
unique aspects of that to each of your different clients in different ways.
But it can also run the danger of triggering, triggering the whole like, Oh,
this is really boring, I can't get anything done, reflex.
And agencies often, I'd say 90% of the time,
are really focused on billable hours.
So a lot of what you're doing is saying,
I think it's going to take me X amount of hours to do,
and then tracking how many hours it took you to do
and billing those hours.
And those two things are absolute nightmares
for the ADHD brain.
So if you find an agency that does like flat billing,
where they're like, we charge X to build you Y, awesome.
um or they do a variety of different work can be really awesome um but often that's not the case
and so where i find that a lot of folks with adhd really do their best work is when they are not
time constrained and the nature of the role is more we've got this big hairy challenge and we're
not really sure how to figure it out we need someone who's really into problem solving to go
like research it and tackle it and you happen to find the problem interesting because if it's just
one of those things you're in trouble um but if it's a big hairy problem and you find it interesting
and they're not like you have 12 hours to figure this out um that can work really really well for
you yeah you're riding the you're riding the wave of the deep the deep the super focus the hyper
focus and just like killing it yeah it hits multiple things at once the challenge triggers
the like the dopamine thing uh it allows you to dig into that like hyper focus really really deep
and crush a whole bunch of work um and look like an absolute rock star um and uh yeah it's one of
those things too where like once you once you get fixated on a thing it's all you'll think about
um and so you'll just keep pulling at pulling at that thread um until you've got it figured out um
yeah so that can work that can work really really well um yeah i don't know where i was going with
this oh yeah we talked it was it was a thing i wrote about the other day that's why we were
talking about daily tips sorry yeah yeah the daily tips look like pretty interesting um people is
that free to sign up for yes yeah that's yeah it's just just every morning you get a just a little
something in your inbox i try to keep them short because again adhd audience right um
these are your people these are my people absolutely um got it got it yeah one of the
other things that comes up a lot too is when you should disclose adhd like if you think you're
going to do that when in the process should you disclose it so right is it your employers
is it their business to even know yeah so that's what really important i had someone ask do i feel
like it's unethical to have a neurological condition that could impact your ability to do the work
and not tell them and i feel very strongly that it is not in any way a problem to do that because
it's none of their damn business like if if you're like if you legitimately think you're
not going to be able to do the work that's a bigger conversation but um if it means that
sometimes you're overproductive and sometimes you're a little underproductive it's kind of a wash
um i i don't have an issue with that just the same way that i think someone not disclosing that
they're pregnant during an interview process or they have cancer during an interview process or
any other sort of medical condition that is none of your employer's business
is totally fine not to disclose um but so for me my my recommendation is that you either
disclose once you've started the job and you have identified the areas where the current
working environment creates challenges for you and you need accommodations or
i will sometimes disclose during an interview process if i'm really like
digging the people i'm interviewing with and i feel like we're all vibing so like i was once on a
an interview where i was asked whether my preference is to have regular check-ins with
with my team on works in progress,
or to go off and build for a few days,
and then reconnect after a few days.
Based on everything we've talked about, Michael,
I'm sure you're not surprised to hear my preference
is to ignore everybody for a couple days and then chat.
But I didn't want to seem like a jerk
who doesn't like my coworkers for saying that.
- Exactly.
- So I was like, oh, I have ADHD, so blah, blah, blah.
And then I found out the interviewer had ADHD,
the other dude on the team we were gonna be working with
had ADHD, the manager had ADHD,
and they were all the same way.
- Awesome, we all agree on this.
- Right, I got a job offer like three days later.
It was amazing.
So best case scenario,
like you could find that works against you.
But yeah, a lot of it is just like a gut vibe thing, right?
Like there's no right answer here.
You can disclose early, you can disclose late,
you can disclose not at all.
You're under no obligation to do so.
- Okay, let's see if we can close up this episode
with maybe see if I can get some more mail.
- Yeah, sure.
Scrum, Agile, paired programming.
None of these things sound appealing to me.
And when Agile first came out,
I thought I was like, that's really interesting.
I find that in practice,
like maybe in principle, it sounds cool.
In practice for me, it's all distracting.
It's all friction and stuff.
- Yep.
- What are your thoughts?
I don't want to put words here.
I'm talking about myself.
So how do you feel about these things?
- Yeah, no, yeah, yes, I agree.
I, I talked recently or I wrote recently about how standups are just productivity killers
for me, depending on when they happen and how they work.
So my, my productivity is variable.
I have days where I will do like eight hours worth of work in four hours and I'll
do that twice.
So I'll get like two or three days worth of work done in a day.
I'll have days where I get nothing done.
something like a daily stand-up really plays into this idea that you are like consistently
productive every day and if i have two or three days where i have to stand up say yeah i'm still
working on that thing that probably should have only taken an hour but i can't make myself do it
i look like a jerk i look like a bad employee right yeah yeah yeah it's setting up to show how
you're not like how you failed that yeah and then that can create this like self-esteem spiral of
like, Oh, I'm really bad at this. Everybody else is getting all this stuff done. Maybe I don't
belong here. Imposter syndrome, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Similarly things like two week sprints
and you know, like a lot of, a lot of those rigid processes, I get why they exist. I understand that
they can work well in certain spaces. I think it's good to have deadlines on when things are going to
show some meaningful progress. But for the way that I work, I find that having those kind of like
rigid fixed deadlines creates bad stress for me and doesn't always align with when my brain is like,
yes, we're going to crank out a ton of work. I personally need a little bit more flexibility
than those types of systems allow. So it's one of those, maybe good for other people,
for me kind of things yeah yeah i don't know and paired programming
i how's that fit with people yeah so it's i it depends um if i am having a problem with code
and i am just absolutely stuck pair programming my way through it can be invaluable
pair programming just for the sake of pair programming is a nightmare for me because it
makes me feel really self-conscious about what i'm doing and how quickly my brain process information
and my like right my process um i like pair programming with other people who need help
as well like in a mentoring capacity if they're like trying to work through something and they
just need someone to kind of like guide them happy to do that um sure i feel that's a little more like
mentoring you know yeah yeah but like just classic i i just generally like i know some some
organizations are really big on you two are going to work on this feature together yes like that
that does not work for me um uh it's i i know i've heard people who really love it they find it very
valuable i'm not trying to take away from that this is not one of those like i think it's bad for
everybody it sucks for me i think it sucks for a lot of folks with adhd yeah i feel like i just
can't get in a flow if i'm sitting and working with somebody i might be having a good time but
it's it's really hard to like reach that like really high level of productivity yeah so you talked
to let's close this out with a bit of a joke okay maybe maybe something practical all right you
talked about the time blindness estimating is hard agile is all about uh uh estimates and stuff you
know yeah so i saw this uh this pretty cool article i talked about on other podcasts python bytes
basically hard to swallow a truce they don't tell you about software engineering but they have a
really great cartoon in here that says uh from monkey user.com is actually where it's originally
from and it's trying to reimagine how you might estimate it says for better estimates instead of
like points or hours whatever we switch to measuring story points too how many duct
duck-sized horses you're willing to fight rather than implementing this task
there's no duck you would fight for because it's so easy or you take on a whole cavalry of like small
duck horses like i don't know what do you think i i actually so i know it's a joke but i find the
stake in the ground comparisons for estimates useful i still don't think i'll always get to an
accurate place but if i say i don't know how long something's going to take and someone says well
do you think it would take 20 hours that gives me like an instant grounding of like oh that feels
high that feels too low or just right it's still in my opinion a bit of a wild guess like once you
start doing the work you will expose things like unknown unknowns that like make oh we thought this
but based on this other thing it's going to take longer or it's going to take way less or it's going
to take about what we thought um but having some sort of grounding whether it's a number of hours
or horse-sized ducks you'd be willing to fight i do actually think that's really useful it's
actually kind of interesting yeah and i feel like there's a there's a human nature aversion to
negativity stronger than a positivity right and this is like how much negativity or how much
resistance do you feel to this i kind of think it's it's a little bit uh maybe not idealistic
but it's i think it goes in the flow of humanity so i think it's it's a funny one the one the one
caveat with this is there are tasks that have been on my to-do list for ages that realistically would
only take 15 to 30 minutes that i will put off for ages usually they're phone call related and i hear
this a lot from fellow adhders like making phone calls it's just really like i i had make an
appointment with a psychiatrist to look into getting adhd medicine on my to-do list for i am
I'm not making this up, three years.
Michael, this was a 15 minute phone call.
- Yep.
- Three years.
'Cause it's not just the phone call,
it's the find a psychologist or psychiatrist
you think you're gonna hit it off with,
make the phone call, pick a date to go there,
get in the car, drive there,
do the whole like social awkward introductions thing,
talk about your feelings, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- And the thing that actually got me over the hurdle,
I found a psychiatrist who has like a,
You fill out your information, we'll call you.
And that was the thing that did it for me.
- Yes, I don't have to navigate a,
right, one of these like, press three for this,
now seven, now enter this.
You entered it wrong, like you did give me all,
I have to look it up.
- So the number of like duck-sized horses
I'd be willing to fight to avoid making a phone call,
which is actually a relatively easy task,
is much higher than the number I'd be willing to fight
to like implement my own e-commerce platform.
You know what I mean? - Sure, yeah, yeah.
I'm gonna write my own crypto
before I make that phone call.
- Even though one is objectively way more difficult
than the other.
- But it estimated, it's a reasonable estimate
of the total time, not the active time.
- For sure.
- So there you go.
I think there's something to it.
All right, Chris, this has been a fun conversation
and hopefully helpful for a lot of folks out there.
Let's wrap it up with a call to action.
People want to learn more.
What are you telling?
- Yeah, so if you want to learn more,
you think you might have ADHD, you do have ADHD,
head over to adhdforthewind.com/Talk Python,
where you can find a whole bunch of resources,
my daily newsletter, and my contact information
if you just want to ask questions or fight me about Paul Graham.
Not a fight I want to have.
I would say all those links and all these things
will be in people's show notes.
So just flip over in your podcast player
and you can get them right there.
Chris, thank you for being on the show.
It's been insightful.
- Michael, thanks so much for having me.
This was truly a pleasure.
- Thanks, bye now.